Hello, welcome to CIS 333. My name is Nate LaClaire, and I will be your instructor for Web Programming: PHP this semester.

So a little about myself. I have been a professional web developer since around 2000, so about 26 years at this point, using PHP since a little before that as a non-professional. And I've built a lot of different websites and web applications in PHP. So I'm looking forward to sharing what I know about this technology with you and also learning about some new stuff along the way with you. I always enjoy courses where I can learn side by side with students and hear different perspectives. And programming courses are really good for that.

This course is delivered entirely online in an asynchronous format. So that means we don't have scheduled class sessions. We'll have recorded lessons and written instructions that are going to be provided in Brightspace every week. You will find the syllabus, as you always find the syllabus in a Brightspace course, by going to the content page and then going to Syllabus here.

I'd like to spend a few minutes going over the Syllabus, talking about what we're going to be doing this semester, and then we'll go over the assignments for this week.

This will be a hands-on course. This will give you both the theoretical foundation and applied skills to use PHP for web publishing and data management. Now, we will be using some HTML, some CSS, maybe even a little bit of JavaScript, because when you're building web applications, those technologies are pretty much a given, although JavaScript is perhaps being replaced somewhat with some other technologies.

PHP is one of the many technologies that you might find on the backend. HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and Web Assembly (WASM) are front end and PHP runs on the server. That's the backend. Similarly, you might see things like Java, C#, Python, Ruby, and even JavaScript or any number of other languages on the backend.

In this course we're going to be actually building web pages with PHP. Many web applications these days are built in such a way that your back end talks to the front end through an application programming interface, or API. And so rather than generating HTML using your backend language like PHP, you're actually talking to a static HTML page using JavaScript and technologies such as AJAX (asynchronous JavaScript and XML). And so you're sending just data between the PHP and the HTML page instead of actually generating HTML pages with PHP. The approach that we're taking for this course is a little more traditional, but I think it's also more accessible. It's a little bit easier to comprehend for somebody who's just getting started with PHP. And eventually, if PHP is something that interests you, you could learn more about that other approach. In CIS 333 and 334, we're not going to completely avoid discussions of writing APIs using PHP, but that will not be our focus for sure.

The course is going to use functional examples and comprehensive hands-on lab activities to reinforce the concepts presented.

Here in the syllabus you'll see information about how to get in touch with me, my email, my telephone, the location of my office here on the Augusta campus. I don't have set office hours but there is a link here to make an appointment with me and I encourage you to do that or send me an email and if needed, I'll suggest that we schedule an appointment. I'm happy to meet with people over Zoom or to have phone conversations or meet in person anytime.

A little about communication and response time. If you send me an email or leave me a voicemail during the week, you should expect a response within one day, generally. Over the weekends or on holidays, you know, it'll be the next business day, generally. Sometimes I do respond by email over the weekend. And if there's ever a situation where I'm going to be unable to respond over an extended period of time, I will let you know in advance, if at all possible. I mean, I suppose emergencies happen, but generally speaking, I'll provide you with advance notice, as well as set up an email auto reply, so that when you send me an email, you get that notification.

Any homework that's turned in on time should be graded within two to three days of the due date. Homework turned in late may take longer for grading. I kind of get into the swing of things with grading a particular assignment, so it takes me longer to grade homework that's turned in late.

Any communications either sent from me or through Brightspace, will go to your maine.edu address. So make sure you're checking that and reach out to UMS IT, if you have any trouble checking that email address.

A little about our textbook. So you can see a picture of it here. The problem with any textbook is that by the time you get it, it's already a little bit out of date. This textbook was published in December 2024, and is based on PHP 8.x, the current major version, but there have been two minor versions released since then. As a result, there are some slight changes to PHP that are not covered in this textbook, but for the most part, the stuff that we're going to be covering is all here in this textbook. When we need to discuss things that are not in the textbook, I will provide supplementary materials for you to read through.

For required software, you're going to need a free GitHub account. We're going to be doing a lot with GitHub this semester. And that's something else that you're going to learn along the way if you aren't already familiar with GitHub. So in one of the assignments this week, we're going to give you some instructions for getting started. We're going to use something called GitHub Codespaces, which is a web-based development environment that uses Visual Studio Code and actually allows you to run your PHP code in the cloud using a container that will be the same for me and you, so we're using the same thing without putting stuff out on the internet where anybody can get to it.

You'll see here our course objectives, learning outcomes, some stuff about electronic learning tools. The thing I want to draw your attention to here is if you have any BrightSpace issues, I encourage you to reach out to the Student TechHub or to UMS IT, contact information is here. If you have issues with GitHub CodeSpaces, or with GitHub, or things that are specific to this class rather than specific to university solutions, you should reach out to me since Tech Hub and UMS IT are not going to be able to help you with those things.

Each week you should be reading the assigned material and performing the activities in the tutorial videos that I will post, completing any homework assignments and quizzes, as well as reviewing any supplementary materials available in Brightspace. You should expect to work an average at two to three hours per credit hour. This is a three-credit course, so that's 6-9 hours a week.

Let's talk about the course outline. Each week you will have videos to watch. You will have what we call Applied Learning Activities. Applied learning activities, reinforcement exercises, and discovery projects will all be completed using GitHub code spaces through GitHub repositories. We're going to talk about that in a few minutes here. So you'll be provided with some starter code, and then through the applied learning activities through the tutorial videos, you'll be modifying that code. Generally speaking, you'll have something that you'll be given to start with and then you'll be building onto that. Other times you might start from scratch, but in all cases you will be actually using GitHub code spaces to add or modify the code, to run the code and test it, and then you will submit it through GitHub. Well, you'll submit it by making a commit to a GitHub repository and then share that with me through Brightspace.

I will, like I mentioned, post supplementary material in Brightspace as well. You should communicate with me if there are things you don't understand. Don't ever hesitate to reach out to me. I would love to talk more about things. So ask questions. That's important.

We'll cover roughly a chapter a week. Some weeks might be a little bit more, some weeks a little bit less. But generally speaking, we're going to be covering one chapter a week. Each week will have an assignment due on Monday night at 11:59 p.m. and then the next week's material will be available on Tuesday morning. So you'll have basically six days to complete each week's assignment.

In order to maximize your learning and your grade, I recommend that you follow along with the applied learning activity videos and complete all reinforcement exercises, discovery projects, and comprehension check quizzes. Each of these types of activities is designed to help you learn and practice the concepts presented in the course, and each contributes to your final grade. I need to see evidence that you have completed each of these activities in order to award you points for them. So make sure that you are committing your code to GitHub so that I can see that you've done the work. The applied learning activities aren't graded for correctness, but you do need to complete them in order to get the points. The reinforcement exercises and discovery projects are graded for correctness, so make sure that you are testing your code and making sure that it works as expected before you commit it to GitHub.

The workflow that we're going to be using with GitHub is a fantastic workflow. Or it's a fantastic beginning of a workflow, I guess. It's not a full workflow. But a lot of teams may use Git repositories as part of a solution or some other source code management tool as part of the workflow. But depending on what you're doing, the team you're working with or maybe you're working on your own, The technologies that you're working with, as far as the production environment and development environments are concerned, you may have other tools that you need. And so in week 15, we're going to spend less time talking about PHP and more time talking about things like SSH, Secure Shell, SFTP, the Secure File Transfer Protocol. Other source code management tools, we'll talk about integrated development environments, just kind of get a lay of the land as far as what you might end up using, even web hosting control panels. We'll talk some about having different environments set up for testing versus developing versus production.

And then you will submit the final project. Here in the syllabus, I talk a little about the final project, but in just a second I'm going to show you where you can learn a lot more about the final project because I want you to get up to speed on that right now.

Also, religious holidays. If you observe a particular religious holiday that is going to be impacted by, or it's going to impact your ability to submit things on time, let me know. I want to work with you. I fully support your religious freedom, and we'll work around it. But just communicate with me. I need you to communicate with me. I need to know.

Grading.

There's some stuff here about communication, academic integrity. You're probably familiar with UMA's academic integrity policy at least somewhat at this point in your career. The one thing I will draw your attention to is this statement on generative artificial intelligence. Basically, please don't use it for writing code, but you are welcome to use it for brainstorming ideation as well as producing web page content that's, you know, for the projects that you're building. Include a statement describing how you used it. And, you know, cite your source, basically. Tell me what tool you used, the prompt that you used, what you typed into the tool, and then a little bit about how much of you, what it gave you used, and what you might have changed about it.

Keep in mind, if you just stop attending, you're not automatically withdrawn from the class, so if you intend to withdraw, talk to the registrar's office or your advisor. Here's a little about some administrative grades, incompletes, accommodations and title 9. Okay, so that's the syllabus.

Let's talk a little about the final project. Actually, let's use this to start talking about how the class is laid out in Brightspace. So pretty much everything that you're going to need for the class other than the syllabus itself shows up here under course content. And the first thing under course content is Final Project. And I've recorded a video that talks about the Final Project, so I'm not going to spend a lot of time talking about it here. But the reason I highlight it here is in week three, so in a couple of weeks, you are going to be asked to submit your idea for the final project so make sure you watch the video, read through this so that you understand what the final project is supposed to be about, and start thinking about an idea that you want to use for the final project so then we're going to go to class one hopefully you're already here because you're watching this video. I don't know how you would be watching the video if you're not already here. Actually, I do know how you might be watching the video if you're not already here. So please come here anyway.

Nomad PHP is a website where you can get these e-courses, videos about things related to PHP. You can attend events, electronic events, and even earn a certification. They have training videos related to a level one PHP certification, and you can actually take the exam to achieve the certification. through a Nomad PHP membership. Well, I have arranged for each of the students in this class to get access to the so-called growth plan of Nomad PHP for the duration of the course. Your membership will provide on-demand access to these videos, livestream talks, and the certification. But I can't just give the names of all my students to another organization. So the point is, if this is something you would like, I need you to complete this survey. Click on this link, complete the survey to indicate to me that you want me to sign you up for this service. And then I will submit your name. You'll get an email invite if I ever quick. So I think this is a fantastic tool. I've learned a lot through this site. It does seem like lately they've had they've slowed down a little bit, but I recently talked with the people who run it. They say they're still working on it, they're still doing more with it. It's not dead, it's just slow. So I'd love to get you access for the duration of the course so you can learn some things that we're not going to be able to cover in the course because this is an entry-level course. And maybe you won't be ready by the end of the course to do any of this stuff either, but things like the certification seem really helpful.

Finally, we have the assignment for this week. Now, a video like this will be included each week in the overview section. Most weeks you'll also see learning outcomes that are going to be covered that week as well as a brief description. And then you will see a listing of each of the tutorial videos for that week, links to resources that apply for that week. and so on, and then you will have the assignment down at the bottom as well as a quiz down at the bottom, if appropriate. So the assignment for this week is to watch this video, which will go through these directions. If you don't already have a free GitHub account, you will sign up for one as part of this. You will then accept your first assignment via GitHub classroom. and you'll follow some steps to get some experience using GitHub and GitHub Code Spaces, which is the online environment for developing and testing. You will then commit your changes to the GitHub repository that was created for you when you accepted the assignment, and you will submit the URL to your repository to me. And that will complete the assignment. Now there's one thing I wanted to mention that is not included in this video. And that is, this is an example of a GitHub repository. You'll see this in the video. But there's this Actions tab that I didn't talk about in the video. And if you click on there, you will see that there are workflows set up. And the only workflow, in fact, is this auto-grading tests. So you'll see there's a green checkmark here next to my most recent test, and you'll see there's a red one here, and there are these others that are, they just have a slash in them. The green means it passed, the red means it failed, and this, I believe, means it got canceled. So this is what GitHub Classroom calls auto-grading. If we click here, we can see there was this run auto-grading test job, and that job included several steps. And the one I want to draw your attention to is this auto-grading reporter. So I am not actually automatically grading your work, despite what the name says. I am using this tool to help both of us figure out how close you are to the goal. I will be manually grading all of your work, but if you don't have green check marks here, if you have red anywhere, then something has failed, and chances are you're not going to get 100% for sure. Now, the fact that you have all greens doesn't mean you've got 100% either, but this is designed to help you. So for this first assignment, the auto grader simply checked PHP linting, which is a process for checking for valid PHP. So it confirmed that the PHP is all valid, yay. And then it ran this test that's labeled as a hello world test. It checked to see that a particular thing came back that was expected. In this case, it was the phrase hello world. And so over the course of the semester, I will be using auto-grading. Every week you'll have PHP linting in place. And most weeks will be using other things as well to check that output matches what is expected. So if you see red here, that means something's not right. Hopefully you won't see red here because you will have fully tested your code before you commit it to the GitHub repository. Now, if you can't figure out what's going wrong, that's okay. The great thing about GitHub is you can commit your changes and then reach out to me, explain what isn't behaving the way you think it should be behaving, and I can look at the GitHub repository. I can actually open up an identical code space to yours using your own code. I can look at things for you with you and then provide you with feedback. You can go back and make changes. Commit those changes. I can then see what you changed. We can have this dialogue back and forth. So seeing red here isn't. It isn't, I mean, depending on it, if you think you're done, then maybe that's a bad thing. But even then, I would say it's not necessarily a bad thing. It might be that something just isn't going the way we want it to go. That doesn't mean you've done anything wrong necessarily. But this is one more tool that we can use. The PHP linter is really handy because it checks to make sure that you don't have any errors. And it looks for other things as well. warnings here too, to make sure that your code is clean, which is a good early indicator of success or failure. So I just wanted to bring that up. You know, check that out when you submit this week's assignment. And then in the coming weeks, you'll see, I'll probably be referring to that from time to time as well. All right. So I hope you are looking forward to the semester. I know I am. I've had, I've really been enjoying going through the textbook and getting ready for the semester. And I hope you will learn a lot. Please, I love feedback. So if you think things are confusing, you know, you didn't follow something, please don't hesitate to say something. Reach out to me. Remember, go to the syllabus, and my contact information is here. I'd love to talk with you anytime. So have a great week, and I look forward to introducing you to chapter one in our textbook. week. 